Add ADR for servala clusters and url naming scheme (#140)
vshn/application-catalog-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/adr/0031-naming-scheme-for-servala-cluster-names-and-urls.adoc

= ADR 0031 - Naming scheme for servala cluster names and URLs
:adr_author:    Nicolas Bigler
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers: 
:adr_date:      2025-04-11
:adr_upd_date:  2025-04-11
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      servala

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
With the launch of Servala we will have multiple clusters running on different cloud providers and on different regions. To ensure consistency and ease of management, it is important to establish a naming scheme for these clusters. This ADR outlines the proposed naming scheme for servala cluster names and URLs.
====

== Context

=== Cluster names

We have two different kind of clusters for servala:
* Control-plane clusters: Those run crossplane and contain all the crossplane resources like functions, composites, api-server etc.
* Service clusters: Those run the workloads that are managed by crossplane.

To properly distinguish and identify each cluster, the cluster name should contain the following information:

> * The ISP where the cluster is running: Cloudscale, Exoscale, etc.

Reviewer: CSP? :D

* The region where the cluster is running: `ch-gva-2`, `lpg1`, etc.
* The type of cluster: `control` or `services`
* The stage of the cluster: `test`, `prod`
* A counter for each cluster to ensure uniqueness.

Lieutenant already gives us part of the naming scheme. Each cluster should be prefixed with `c-` followed by the tenant, so that it can easily identify which tenant owns the cluster.

=== URLs

We have to differnt URLs that are important:
* The clusters API endpoint
* The apps endpoint of Openshift for applications on the service clusters

The defaults for Openshift are:

* `api.[clustername].domain.tld`
* `*.apps.[clustername].domain.tld`

== Decision

=== Cluster names

Putting all the information above together we propose the following naming scheme for servala cluster names:

`c-servala-[type]-[csp]-[region]-[stage][counter]`

Examples:

* First production control-Plane cluster running on cloudscale in the lgp1:
`c-servala-control-cloudscale-lpg1-prod1`

* Second test service-cluster running on exoscale in the ch-gva-2 region:

> `c-servala-services-exoscale-ch-gva-2-test2`

Author: That is not a typo and is supposed to be plural as the cluster contains multiple *services*

> `c-servala-services-exoscale-ch-gva-2-test2`

Author: As discussed, it makes sense to use the singular form as it describes the function of the cluster

> = ADR 0031 - Naming scheme for servala cluster names and URLs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= ADR 0031 - Naming scheme for Servala cluster names and URLs
```

:adr_author:    Nicolas Bigler
:adr_owner:     Schedar
:adr_reviewers: 
:adr_date:      2025-04-11
:adr_upd_date:  2025-04-11
:adr_status:    draft

> :adr_tags:      servala

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:adr_tags:      servala,naming,scheme,cluster
```

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====

> With the launch of Servala we will have multiple clusters running on different cloud providers and on different regions. To ensure consistency and ease of management, it is important to establish a naming scheme for these clusters. This ADR outlines the proposed naming scheme for servala cluster names and URLs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the launch of Servala we will have multiple clusters running on different cloud providers and on different regions. To ensure consistency and ease of management, it is important to establish a naming scheme for these clusters. This ADR outlines the proposed naming scheme for Servala cluster names and URLs.
```

====

== Context

=== Cluster names

> We have two different kind of clusters for servala:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have two different kind of clusters for servala:
```

> * Control-plane clusters: Those run crossplane and contain all the crossplane resources like functions, composites, api-server etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Control-plane clusters: Those run Crossplane and contain all the Crossplane resources like functions, composites, api-server etc.
```

> * Service clusters: Those run the workloads that are managed by crossplane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Service clusters: Those run the workloads that are managed by Crossplane.
```

To properly distinguish and identify each cluster, the cluster name should contain the following information:
* The CSP where the cluster is running: Cloudscale, Exoscale, etc.
* The region where the cluster is running: `ch-gva-2`, `lpg1`, etc.
* The type of cluster: `control` or `service`
* The stage of the cluster: `test`, `prod`
* A counter for each cluster to ensure uniqueness.

Lieutenant already gives us part of the naming scheme. Each cluster should be prefixed with `c-` followed by the tenant, so that it can easily identify which tenant owns the cluster.

=== URLs

> We have to differnt URLs that are important:
> * The clusters API endpoint
> * The apps endpoint of Openshift for applications on the service clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have two different URLs that are important:
* The Kubernetes API endpoint
* The apps endpoint of OpenShift for applications on the service clusters
```

I don't fully understand the "apps" endpoint because for Servala this one doesn't really matter. This mainly is relevant for a full-fledged OpenShift cluster to have a default domain for apps running on them.

> The defaults for Openshift are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The defaults in OpenShift are:
```

* `api.[clustername].domain.tld`
* `*.apps.[clustername].domain.tld`

== Decision

=== Cluster names

> Putting all the information above together we propose the following naming scheme for servala cluster names:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Putting all the information above together we propose the following naming scheme for Servala cluster names:
```

> `c-servala-[type]-[csp]-[region]-[stage][counter]`

Reviewer 2: Please clearly describe each parameter. You can use https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/lists/description/ for that.

Author: Done

Examples:

> * First production control-plane cluster running on cloudscale in the lgp1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* First production control-plane cluster running on Cloudscale in the lpg1 zone:
```

`c-servala-control-cloudscale-lpg1-prod1`

> * Second test service cluster running on exoscale in the ch-gva-2 region:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Second test service cluster running on Exoscale in the ch-gva-2 region:
```

`c-servala-service-exoscale-ch-gva-2-test2`

=== URLs

> We have a dedicated domain for servala clusters: servala.com and will use that domain for all clusters

Reviewer 2: As this domain is also used for the website, portal, etc. I suggest moving to a subdomain, e.g.:

* Control-plane clusters: *.control.servala.com
* Service cluster *.services.servala.com

Author: I already suggested the subdomain for control.servala.com.
For the service clusters I wouldn't use services.servala.com as it will just unnecessarily increase the domain name and the default apps domain on openshift already is `*.apps.<cluster_name>.<domain>`

Reviewer 2: Ok, I think this is good enough

The control-plane clusters API should be reachable under the following URL: `api.[csp]-[region]-[stage][counter].control.servala.com`

The apps domain for the services should be: `*.apps.[csp]-[region]-[stage][counter].servala.com`

Examples:

> * First production control-plane cluster running on cloudscale in the lgp1 region:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* First production control-plane cluster running on Cloudscale in the lpg1 region:
```

`api.cloudscale-lpg1-prod1.control.servala.com`

> * Second test service cluster running on exoscale in the ch-gva-2 region:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Second test service cluster running on Exoscale in the ch-gva-2 region:
```

:adr_reviewers: 
:adr_date:      2025-04-11
:adr_upd_date:  2025-04-11
:adr_status:    draft
:adr_tags:      servala,naming,scheme,cluster

include::partial$adr-meta.adoc[]

[NOTE]
.Summary
====
With the launch of Servala we will have multiple clusters running on different cloud providers and on different regions. To ensure consistency and ease of management, it is important to establish a naming scheme for these clusters. This ADR outlines the proposed naming scheme for Servala cluster names and URLs.
====

== Context

=== Cluster names

We have two different kind of clusters for Servala:
* Control-plane clusters: Those run Crossplane and contain all the Crossplane resources like functions, composites, api-server etc.
* Service clusters: Those run the workloads that are managed by Crossplane.

To properly distinguish and identify each cluster, the cluster name should contain the following information:
* The CSP where the cluster is running: Cloudscale, Exoscale, etc.
* The region where the cluster is running: `ch-gva-2`, `lpg1`, etc.
* The type of cluster: `control` or `service`
* The stage of the cluster: `test`, `prod`
* A counter for each cluster to ensure uniqueness.

> Lieutenant already gives us part of the naming scheme. Each cluster should be prefixed with `c-` followed by the tenant, so that it can easily identify which tenant owns the cluster.

Reviewer 3: Note that Lieutenant doesn't care whether you add the tenant to the cluster ID, since it only relies on the cluster's `spec.tenantRef.name` to establish the link to the tenant.

```suggestion
Lieutenant already gives us part of the naming scheme. Each cluster should be prefixed with `c-` followed by the tenant, so that it's easy for users to identify which tenant owns the cluster.
```

=== URLs

We have two different URLs that are important:
* The Kubernetes API endpoint
* The apps endpoint of OpenShift for applications on the service clusters

The defaults in OpenShift are:

* `api.[clustername].domain.tld`
* `*.apps.[clustername].domain.tld`

== Decision

=== Cluster names

Putting all the information above together we propose the following naming scheme for Servala cluster names:

> `c-servala-[type]-[csp]-[region]-[stage][counter]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`c-servala-[TYPE]-[CSP]-[REGION]-[STAGE][COUNTER]`
```

It's written all-caps in the definition list, so let's do that here as well.

TYPE:: The type of the cluster. `control` or `service`
CSP:: The CSP where the cluster is running. cloudscale, exoscale, etc.

> REGION:: The region on the CSP where the cluster is running. `ch-gva-2`, `lpg1`, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REGION:: The region on the CSP where the cluster is running. `ch-gva-2`, `lpg1`, etc. Use the same naming as the CSP.
```
